 

[XRDS] [/]

CROSSROADS THE ACM MAGAZINE FOR STUDENTS

 	* Skip to navigation [n]
 	* Skip to content [c]
 	* Skip to footer [f]

Subscribe
[https://campus.acm.org/public/qj/brandingqj/brandingqj_control.cfm?x=xrds&PROMO=XRDSONS&form_type=Student]
| About [/about.cfm] | Submit [/get-involved.cfm] | [Facebook Page]
[https://www.facebook.com/acmXRDS] [Twitter Page]
[https://twitter.com/XRDS_ACM] [RSS Page] [/alerts.cfm]

Sign In [https://xrds.acm.org/signin.cfm]

[Association for Computing Machinery] [http://www.acm.org/]

	* Home [/index.cfm]

	* News [/news.cfm]

	* Current News [/news.cfm]
 	* Archive 2016 [/news-archive-2016.cfm]
 	* Archive 2015 [/news-archive-2015.cfm]
 	* Archive 2011 [/news-archive-2011.cfm]
 	* Archive 2010 [/news-archive-2010.cfm]

 	* Events [/events.cfm]

	* Magazine [/current-issue.cfm]

	* Feature Articles [/archives.cfm?search=Features]
 	* Letters from Editors
[/archives.cfm?search=Letter%20from%20the%20editors]
 	* Inbox [/archives.cfm?search=Inbox]
 	* Advice [/archives.cfm?search=Advice]
 	* Updates [/archives.cfm?search=Updates]
 	* Milestones [http://xrds.acm.org/archives.cfm?search=Milestones]
 	* Careers [/archives.cfm?search=Careers]
 	* Hello World [/archives.cfm?search=Hello%20World]
 	* Labz [/archives.cfm?search=Labz]
 	* Back [/archives.cfm?search=back]

 	* Blog [http://xrds.acm.org/blog]
 	* Archives [/archives.cfm]

	* Get Involved [/get-involved.cfm]

	* Get Involved [/get-involved.cfm]
 	* Get Mentioned in XRDS [/getmentioned.cfm]
 	* Join the Team [/get-involved.cfm#join]
 	* Author Guidelines [/authorguidelines.cfm]

	* Resources [/resources.cfm]

	* Resources [/resources.cfm]
 	* Author Guidelines [/authorguidelines.cfm]
 	* Editorial Calendar [/editorialcalendar.cfm]
 	* Code [http://xrds.acm.org/code.cfm]
 	* Multimedia [/multimedia.cfm]
 	* Puzzle Solutions [/bemusement/]

Search Search

MAGAZINE: AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GIMP

FREE CONTENT FEATURE

 	* Share
[http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=250&username=xa-4be865c838d71fd5]
 	* Comment
 	* Save
[http://dl.acm.org/ft_gateway.cfm?id=270972&type=pdf&ip=68.181.206.136&ua=]
 	* Print

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GIMP

By Matt Cutts, May 1997

Full text also available in the ACM Digital Library as PDF | HTML |
Digital Edition
[http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=270955.270972&coll=portal&dl=ACM]

Tags: Design [/archives.cfm?tag=Design], Graphics input devices
[/archives.cfm?tag=Graphics%20input%20devices], Graphics systems and
interfaces [/archives.cfm?tag=Graphics%20systems%20and%20interfaces],
Human Factors [/archives.cfm?tag=Human%20Factors], Human computer
interaction (HCI)
[/archives.cfm?tag=Human%20computer%20interaction%20%28HCI%29],
Management [/archives.cfm?tag=Management], Performance
[/archives.cfm?tag=Performance], Theory [/archives.cfm?tag=Theory]

 

 AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GIMP 

by Matt Cutts

 WHAT IS THE GIMP? 

The GIMP stands for General Image Manipulation Program (or the GNU
Image Manipulation Program). The GIMP is a free, robust, powerful
program for painting, image processing, and manipulating pictures. If
you enjoy using Adobes Photoshop® program, youll love the GIMP. The
GIMP is a project of Spencer Kimball and Peter Mattis at the
University of California, Berkeley. It began as a compiler class
project in LISP. Frustration with the program, plus system crashes,
pushed the project in a new direction. Instead of LISP, the students
decided to write an image manipulation project in C. The result has
quickly grown into a full-fledged image editing program.

One critical aspect of the GIMP is that it is free software. It is
released under the General Public License of the Free Software
Foundation. That means that you can always obtain the source to the
program. Furthermore, it is free for downloading over the Internet.
The GIMP fills the need for a free Photoshop®-like program. The tool
is available for most UNIX platforms. Binary versions are available
for Solaris, SunOS, HP-UX, SGIs IRIX, Linux, and FreeBSD. Since the
program is written for UNIX, youre out of luck if you only have access
to Microsoft Windows or Apple Macintosh machines.

If you do install and run the GIMP, youll find that it is packed with
features. Paint tools include a paintbrush, airbrush, text tools,
clone, blur, and sharpen. You can also transform images with rotation,
scaling, flipping, and shearing. The GIMP supports many common file
formats: TIFF, GIF, JPEG, BMP, PPM, etc. Selections can be performed
with rectangle, ellipse, and freehand tools. If thats not enough, you
can use intelligent scissors, fuzzy selection by color, and even
bezier selection. The program supports a full host of channel
operations and many types of displays from 8 bit to 24 bit. Newer beta
versions of the program support layers, transparency, and scripts to
automatically generate logos and other images. Soon the program may be
able to operate with graphics tablets.

One fantastic feature is the ability to use PLUG-INS, which let users
create their own custom features and special effects. Volunteers and
the GIMP enthusiasts have written close to a hundred different
plug-ins including pinch, despeckle, oilify, plasma, map to sphere,
fade, mosaic, line integral convolution, motion blur, engrave, page
curl, sparkle, checkerboard, lens flare, displace, lunarize,
de-interlace, and extrude. Users can get these plug-ins from the Web
easily or write their own.

 HOW DO I GET IT? 

Youre probably wondering how to get the GIMP and try it out. You can
download binary code for many platforms from the GIMPs home page (see
http://www.XCF.Berkeley.EDU/~gimp/). The file will appear something
like "gimp-0.54-linux-ELF-bin.tar.gz" and will be quite large. You
will want to untar the program with a command like "tar zxvf
gimp-0.54-linux-ELF-bin.tar.gz". If your version of tar is old, you
can execute "gzip -cd gimp-0.54-linux-ELF-bin.tar.gz | tar xvf -".
Once the program is unpacked, change into the "gimp" directory. Youll
see README files and a file called "gimprc". You should execute "cp
gimprc ~/.gimprc" to make a copy of your own gimp configuration file.
Youll need to edit ~/.gimprc to add the path where you unpacked the
directory. Alternatively, you can try the program out by running
"gimp" while you are in the gimp directory.

 HOW DO I USE IT? 

When you run the program for the first time, you will see the main
application "toolbox." From this menu you can perform most of the
GIMPs operations. You will also see the menus for files operations.

FIGURE 1

Figure 1 shows the main menu with some of the buttons labeled. The
selection tools are near the top of the dialog, while other tools fill
out the other rows. The tools that are built into GIMP on the main
menu include moving, magnification, cropping, transforming, flipping,
text, color picking, fill, blending, pencil, paintbrush, eraser,
airbrush, clone and convolve. Once you open an image, it will appear
in its own window. The menus can be accessed quickly by clicking the
right mouse button while over the image. Plug-ins are also accessed
with the right mouse button or with keyboard short-cuts (also found in
the ~/.gimprc file). You will find that most tools operate like other
image manipulation programs you may have used before. GIMP is
structured in this way to make operations more familiar and easier to
use. With a little practice, you can be editing images very quickly.
You can also access a variety of tutorials on GIMP over the Web, as
you will discover in the next section.

Lets do a simple task right now so you can see how easy it is to start
using the GIMP. Lets create an effect known as a "drop shadow" for a
rectangular image. A drop shadow looks like a blurry shadow underneath
an image. It helps add depth to a picture. You can see the before and
after images below.

 [http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpf2a.jpg]
FIGURE 2 [white padding]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpf2b.jpg]

First we need an image. I started with a picture of a campus landmark
at my university. One nice feature about the GIMP is that you can
reach all of its functions by clicking with the right button on the
image to bring up a pop-up menu that looks like this:

FIGURE 5

From the menu shown in Figure 5, you can probe further down into more
choices. For example, to make sure the image is full-color, you should
move the mouse to select "Filters," then "Conversions," and finally
"To Color." We will abbreviate this procedure as
"Filters->Conversions->To Color." Assuming that you have just opened
an image and made sure that it is full-color, were ready to start.

First, you need some padding around your image. Execute "File->New" on
the original image and pad the width and height by 100 pixels or so.
Select RGB for the image type. This creates a new, larger image with a
white background. For the next step, we want to execute
"Select->Select All" and then "Edit->Copy" on the original image. Move
to the newly created white image and execute "Edit->Paste." Now you
should have an image with some white padding around it:

[figure]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpimga.jpg]
Image A

Well label this first padded image Image A. Now execute
"Filters->Channel Ops->Duplicate." Note that you get a copy of Image
A. Well use that copy later. The first version of Image A should have
a moving border around the inner image. That border is sometimes
called "marching ants," and it represents a part of the image which is
selected. Now we want to fill the selection with solid black, so
execute "Tools->Bucket Fill." Then click the left button of the mouse
inside the selection and it will be filled with solid black:

[figure]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpimgb.jpg]
Image B

Were halfway done. By executing "Filters->Channel Ops->Offset" on
Image B and selecting an X and Y displacement of about 20 pixels in
each direction, we get an image where the black rectangle has moved
some:

[figure]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpimgc.jpg]
Image C

To make the shadow of the picture blurry, do the command
"Filters->Blur->Gaussian Blur" and use a radius of about 8.0 pixels.
The result will look like Image D:

[figure]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpimgd.jpg]Image
D

Now we are ready to make our final image. Execute "Filters->Channel
Ops->Composite." Our goal is to composite our copy of Image A with
Image D using Image B as our mask. The mask will take the pixels from
Image A where Image B is black and take pixels from Image D where
Image B is white. The composite window will have pull-down menus for
your choices. Look at the titlebars to find which actual images
correspond to Images A, B, and D. When you click "OK," youll get the
final result:

[figure]
[http://deliveryimages.acm.org/10.1145/280000/270972/gfx/gimpimge.jpg]Final
Image

Now you can create a drop shadow anytime! Youll discover that practice
makes everything easier and that keyboard shortcuts exist for most
common operations. After a little while using the GIMP, you could
probably create a drop shadow in just a few seconds. Also notice that
you can experiment with all kinds of variations like shadows of
irregularly shaped selections or different colors. In the future, the
GIMP will allow scripting of common sequences of commands. This might
let you built a drop shadow macro that works with just a keystroke. If
you like the power and flexibility of the GIMP, the information in the
next section will help you get started and show you where to find more
ideas and other tutorials.

 WHERE CAN I GET MORE INFO? 

Since the growth of the GIMP is due in large part to the Internet and
the Web, it shouldnt be surprising that quite a few sites devoted to
the GIMP exist. You can start at the GIMPs official home page at
http://www.XCF.Berkeley.EDU/~gimp/ to find stable source code, whats
new with the program, screen shots, and some tutorials. The authors
deserve lots of credit for making such a powerful program a reality
and then releasing it for general usage. You can find links at
http://abattoir.cc.ndsu.nodak.edu/~nem/gimp/tuts for even more
tutorials.

An abundance of GIMP pages can be found using your favorite search
engine. One good place to start is the "Everybody loves The GIMP" page
at http://luthien.nuclecu.unam.mx/~federico/gimp/index.html, by
Federico Mena Quintero. Besides a source tree for newer versions of
the GIMP, you can find tons of links to other resources: mailing
lists, plug-ins, other peoples pages, and tutorials. The page is also
updated quite often. Another good page is by Zach Beane at
http://xach.dornet.com.xach.html.

For developers interested in writing a plug-in, you should visit the
GIMP Plug-in Registry by Adam Moss at
http://www.worldserver.pipex.com/home/adam/gimp/plug.html first. This
page has a list of the current plug-ins that are available, so you can
check if the effect you want has already been written. Along with
short descriptions of what each filter does, you can find out who
wrote the plug-in and when. Binaries are available for Linux and you
can download source code from this site too. In case you decide to
design your own plug-in, another useful page can be found at
http://www2.ai-lab.fh-furtwangen.de/~bless/the-gimp.html. This site,
maintained by Marc Bless, has pointers to the GIMP Programmers
Reference Book. The documentation covers most aspects of writing a
plug-in and even has complete templates. You can retrieve the
information in HTML, SGML, PostScript, and .dvi formats.

The web has many more great GIMP pages than I could possibly mention.
You should take an hour to investigate all the wonderful pages created
people around the world about the GIMP. The time you spend exploring
the GIMP and its uses can be immensely entertaining and yet
educational too.

Matt Cutts (cutts@cs.unc.edu) is a doctoral student in the Computer
Science department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
His research areas include graphics, computer vision, and novel ways
of getting input to a "box" and output from a "box." He is interested
in different ways to make information clearer to people, and to allow
people to communicate in a more intuitive fashion.

COMMENTS

There are no comments at this time.
  
To comment you must create or log in with your ACM account
[/signin.cfm].

About XRDS [/about.cfm] | About the Editors [/aboutus.cfm] | Renew
Membership [http://www.acm.org/renew] | Subscribe
[https://campus.acm.org/public/qj/GenPUBQJ/PUBLIST/genpubqj_publist.cfm]
| Sign In [/signin.cfm] | Information for Authors
[/authorguidelines.cfm] | Privacy [/privacy.cfm] | Site Map
[/sitemap.cfm] | Help [/help.cfm] | Contact Us [/contact.cfm] |
Advertise [http://acm-media.org/]
Copyright © 2017 by the ACM. All rights reserved. 